Add the ORT-Web Tutorial, Add link to GitHub ORT Web template on docs home page (#9738)
microsoft/onnxruntime: docs/tutorials/web.md

nav_order: 7
---

> # Deploy and inference ML models on the web

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Classify images in a web application
```

Author: I am not sure I agree with the change. What is the reason that you think the title should be changed? I was thinking about SEO and the title of the nav (which was there prior to this doc)

Reviewer: I'm thinking we'll end up with a few specific web tutorials. With the more generic title, the implication that this is a more generic tutorial

{: .no_toc }

> In this tutorial we will use a template QuickStart to start building out a static web app using ONNX Runtime web. We will do the inference in JavaScript on the browser for a computer vision model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will use a GitHub repository template to build an image classification web app using ONNX Runtime web. We will do the inference in JavaScript on the browser for a computer vision model.
```

One of the hardest parts when deploying and inferencing in languages that are not commonly used for data science is figuring out how to do the data processing and inferencing. We have done all the hard work for you with [this template](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-nextjs-template)! 

Below is what the site looks like from the template. It is looping through a list of example images, calling the inference session with a SqueezeNet model, then returning the score and label from inference.

Example template output:

> <img src="../../images/ort-web-demo.gif" width="75%" height="75%"/>

Reviewer: Can we make this a bit bigger? It's really hard to see the output. Also we should add alt text to the image for accessibility.

Author: Changed to 100%, is that better? Or still too small?

Reviewer: Looks exactly the same to me. Don't worry about it for now. We can try and finesse it later

Reviewer: Can we add the alt text though?

Author: good catch, added!

- **It's cheaper.** You can reduce cloud serving costs by offloading inference to the browser.

### Why wouldn't you want to inference in the browser?
{: .no_toc }
- **The model is too large** and requires higher hardware specs. In order to do inference on the client you need to have a model that is small enough to run efficiently on less powerful hardware. 
- You don't want the model to be downloaded onto the device.

## Get a model from the ONNX Model Zoo or use your own

1. ONNX Model Zoo

  We will be using [SqueezeNet](https://github.com/onnx/models/tree/master/vision/classification/squeezenet) from the [ONNX Model Zoo](https://github.com/onnx/models). SqueezeNet models perform image classification - they take images as input and classify the major object in the image into a set of pre-defined classes. They are trained on the ImageNet dataset which contains images from 1000 different classes. SqueezeNet models are highly efficient in terms of size and speed while providing good accuracies. This makes them ideal for platforms with strict constraints on size, like client side inferencing.

> 2. Create a model and export to ONNX Format

Reviewer: This is still showing up as a 1

Author: switch to bullet points

> nav_order: 7

Author: is this a like this "description: text"? I dont see it in the Just the Docs or on other pages. Do you have an example?

---

> # Deploy and inference ML models on the web

Author: added

> One of the hardest parts when deploying and inferencing in languages that are not commonly used for data science is figuring out how to do the data processing and inferencing. We have done all the hard work for you with [this template](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-nextjs-template)! In this tutorial we will use a template QuickStart to start building out a static web app using ORT-web. We will do the inference in JavaScript on the browser for a computer vision model. Let's learn a bit more about the library, ONNX Runtime Web, which allows us to inference in many different languages.

Author: added

> Example template output:

Reviewer: Can we describe what the application does in a little more detail?

Author: added

> <img src="../../images/ort-web-demo.gif" width="75%" height="75%"/>

Reviewer 2: nit, can you make this gif not jump (up and down a couple pixels) between frames?

Author: update gif so the page doesnt jump by removing inferencing time so dom doesnt have different sized elements.

> ## What is ORT-Web?

Author: fixed to "What is ONNX Runtime Web (ORT-Web)?"

> `ORT-Web` enables JavaScript developers to run and deploy machine learning models client-side. With ORT web you have the option to use a backend of either `WebGL` for GPU processing or `WASM` for CPU processing. All ONNX operators are supported by the WASM backend but only a subset are currently supported by the WebGL backend. If you want to do JavaScript server side inferencing with node checkout the [onnxruntime-node library](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/get-started/with-javascript.html#onnx-runtime-nodejs-binding).

Author: updated by spelling out web assembly

> `ORT-Web` enables JavaScript developers to run and deploy machine learning models client-side. With ORT web you have the option to use a backend of either `WebGL` for GPU processing or `WASM` for CPU processing. All ONNX operators are supported by the WASM backend but only a subset are currently supported by the WebGL backend. If you want to do JavaScript server side inferencing with node checkout the [onnxruntime-node library](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/get-started/with-javascript.html#onnx-runtime-nodejs-binding).

Reviewer 3: reopen this. i would prefer to use lower-case 'webgl' and 'wasm', because users may put them into executionProvider config, which will not work for 'WebGL' and 'WASM'.

> `ORT-Web` enables JavaScript developers to run and deploy machine learning models client-side. With ORT web you have the option to use a backend of either `WebGL` for GPU processing or `WASM` for CPU processing. All ONNX operators are supported by the WASM backend but only a subset are currently supported by the WebGL backend. If you want to do JavaScript server side inferencing with node checkout the [onnxruntime-node library](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/get-started/with-javascript.html#onnx-runtime-nodejs-binding).

Author: changed to lowercase, thanks!

- **It works offline.** If you lose internet connection, the model will still be able to inference.
- **It's cheaper.** You can reduce cloud serving costs by offloading inference to the browser.

### Why wouldn't you want to inference in the browser?
- **The model is too large** and requires higher hardware specs. In order to do inference on the client you need to have a model that is small enough to run efficiently on less powerful hardware. 
- You don't want the model to be downloaded onto the device.

## Get a model from the ONNX Model Zoo or use your own

1. ONNX Model Zoo

We will be using [SqueezeNet](https://github.com/onnx/models/tree/master/vision/classification/squeezenet) from the [ONNX Model Zoo](https://github.com/onnx/models). SqueezeNet models perform image classification - they take images as input and classify the major object in the image into a set of pre-defined classes. They are trained on the ImageNet dataset which contains images from 1000 different classes. SqueezeNet models are highly efficient in terms of size and speed while providing good accuracies. This makes them ideal for platforms with strict constraints on size, like client side inferencing.

> 2. Create a model and export to ONNX Format

Author: added

```javascript
// Language: typescript
// Path: react-next\utils\predict.ts
import getImageTensorFromPath from './imageHelper';
import {runSqueezenetModel} from './modelHelper';

export async function inferenceSqueezenet(path: string): Promise<[any,number]> {
  // 1. Convert image to tensor
  const imageTensor = await getImageTensorFromPath(path);
  // 2. Run model
  const [predictions, inferenceTime] = await runSqueezenetModel(imageTensor);
  // 3. Return predictions and the amount of time it took to inference.
  return [predictions, inferenceTime];
}
```
### imageHelper.ts

First, we need to get our image from path (can be local or url) and convert it to a tensor. The `getImageTensorFromPath` function in the `imageHelper.ts` uses `JIMP` to read the file, resize and return the `imageData`. [JIMP](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jimp) is a JavaScript image manipulation library. It has many built in functions for working with image data such as resizing, grey scale, write, and more. In this example we only need to resize however in your code you may need additional image data processing. 

```javascript
import Jimp  from 'jimp/*';
import { Tensor } from 'onnxruntime-web';

> const jimp = require('jimp');

Reviewer 3: [example code] should not use both "import" and "require" in one script. ( did you try `import * as Jimp from 'jimp';` ?)

Author: removed dup require import

export default async function getImageTensorFromPath(path: string, dims: number[] =  [1, 3, 224, 224]): Promise<Tensor> {
  // 1. load the image  
  var image = await loadImagefromPath(path, dims[2], dims[3]);
  // 2. convert to tensor
  var imageTensor = imageDataToTensor(image, dims);
  // 3. return the tensor
  return imageTensor;
}

async function loadImagefromPath(path: string, width: number = 224, height: number= 224): Promise<Jimp> {
 // Use Jimp to load the image and resize it.

>     var imageData = await jimp.default.read(path).then((imageBuffer: Jimp) => {

Reviewer 3: [example code] don't use 'await' with 'then' in one context. suggest to always use await in example code

Author: .then is for the function once the promise is returned, not sure I understand what you want changed here?

      });

    return imageData;
}
```

Once we have the imageData we will send it into the `imageDataToTensor` function to convert it to an ORT Tensor for inferencing. To convert an image to a tensor in JavaScript we need to get the RGB (Red, Green, Blue) values into arrays. To do this we will loop through the `imageBufferData` by each pixels 4 channels of RGBA. Once we have the RGB pixel channels for the image, then we create the `Float32Array` from the `transposedData` and divide by 
255 to normalize the value. Why does 255 normalize the pixel value? Well normalization is a technique used to change values to a common scale without distorting the differences. 255 is the max number for an RGB value, so dividing by 255 normalizes our values to between 0 and 1 without losing the statistical differences.  Now that we have the `Float32Array` representation of the image we can create the ORT Tensor by sending in the type, data, and dimensions. Then we return the inputTensor for inferencing.

```javascript
function imageDataToTensor(image: Jimp, dims: number[]): Tensor {
    // 1. Get buffer data from image and create R, G, and B arrays.
    var imageBufferData = image.bitmap.data;

>     const [redArray, greenArray, blueArray] = new Array(new Array<number>(), Array<number>(), Array<number>());

Reviewer 3: ```
const redArray = [];
const greenArray = [];
const blueArray = [];
```

Author: Both of these work and its really more of a preference, so I think we can leave it.

Reviewer 3: the current code does not keep consistent code style, (like using `new Array()` and `Array()` at the same time), and is less verbose.

if you prefer to use `Array`, it is still better to do like:
`const [redArray, greenArray, blueArray] = [new Array<number>(), new Array<number>(), new Array<number>()]`

Author: I see, added new to the other two array objects.

import {imagenetClasses} from '../data/imagenet';
import { InferenceSession } from 'onnxruntime-web';

const [predictions, inferenceTime] = await runSqueezenetModel(imageTensor);

export async function runSqueezenetModel(preprocessedData: any): Promise<[any, number]> {
    
    // Create session and set options. See the docs here for more options: 
    //https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/api/js/interfaces/InferenceSession.SessionOptions.html#graphOptimizationLevel

    const session = await ort.InferenceSession
                            .create('./_next/static/chunks/pages/squeezenet1_1.onnx', 
                            { executionProviders: ['webgl'], graphOptimizationLevel: 'all' });
    console.log('Inference session created')

    // Run inference and get results.
    var [results, inferenceTime] =  await runInference(session, preprocessedData);
    return [results, inferenceTime];
 
  }

```

Then let's call the `runInference` function by sending in the `session` and our input tensor `preprocessedData`.

```javascript
  async function runInference(session: InferenceSession, preprocessedData: any): Promise<[any, number]> {

    // Get start time to calculate inference time.

>     const start = new Date();

Reviewer 3: use `Performance.now()` instead of `Date`

Author: In this scenario I want to use Date.Now now Performance.Now to measure time.

    "typescript": "4.4.2"
  }
}

```

## Run the project locally

We are ready to run the project. Run the command based on if you want to start with debugging, build the `out` folder, or start without debugging.

```javascript
// to run with debugging
npm run dev
// to build the project
npm run build
// to run without debugging
npm run start
```
## Deploy to Azure Static Web Apps

Now that we have built out the site we are ready to deploy it to a [Azure Static Web Apps](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/static-web-apps). Check out the docs to learn how to deploy using Azure [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/static-web-apps/deploy-nextjs).

##  TypeScript Notebook

We have walked through how to use this template, there is a bonus here though! Under the notebook folder in the tempalte there is a [notebook](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-nextjs-template/blob/main/notebook/inferenceNotebook.ipynb) with this code for you to experiment and try out changes you might need. This way if you have a different model or image you want to try out you can do it quite easily. To use the TypeScript Jupyter notebook download the VS Code Jupyter notebooks extension. 

> ## More Resources

Author: added

### predict.ts
{: .no_toc }
```javascript
// Language: typescript
// Path: react-next\utils\predict.ts
import getImageTensorFromPath from './imageHelper';
import {runSqueezenetModel} from './modelHelper';

export async function inferenceSqueezenet(path: string): Promise<[any,number]> {
  // 1. Convert image to tensor
  const imageTensor = await getImageTensorFromPath(path);
  // 2. Run model
  const [predictions, inferenceTime] = await runSqueezenetModel(imageTensor);
  // 3. Return predictions and the amount of time it took to inference.
  return [predictions, inferenceTime];
}
```
### imageHelper.ts
{: .no_toc }
First, we need to get our image from path (can be local or url) and convert it to a tensor. The `getImageTensorFromPath` function in the `imageHelper.ts` uses `JIMP` to read the file, resize and return the `imageData`. [JIMP](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jimp) is a JavaScript image manipulation library. It has many built in functions for working with image data such as resizing, grey scale, write, and more. In this example we only need to resize however in your code you may need additional image data processing. 

```javascript

> import Jimp  from 'jimp/*';

Reviewer 4: two space between 'Jimp  from'

Author: fixed

> import { Tensor } from 'onnxruntime-web';

Reviewer 4: {Tensor} for consistency

Author: I chose to have a space before and after the import, I have made all the files be consistent to follow that design

export default async function getImageTensorFromPath(path: string, dims: number[] =  [1, 3, 224, 224]): Promise<Tensor> {
  // 1. load the image  
  var image = await loadImagefromPath(path, dims[2], dims[3]);
  // 2. convert to tensor
  var imageTensor = imageDataToTensor(image, dims);
  // 3. return the tensor
  return imageTensor;
}

async function loadImagefromPath(path: string, width: number = 224, height: number= 224): Promise<Jimp> {

>  // Use Jimp to load the image and resize it.

Reviewer 4: indentation

Author: fixed

    var imageBufferData = image.bitmap.data;
    const [redArray, greenArray, blueArray] = new Array(new Array<number>(), new Array<number>(), new Array<number>());

    // 2. Loop through the image buffer and extract the R, G, and B channels
    for (let i = 0; i < imageBufferData.length; i += 4) {
      redArray.push(imageBufferData[i]);
      greenArray.push(imageBufferData[i + 1]);
      blueArray.push(imageBufferData[i + 2]);
      // skip data[i + 3] to filter out the alpha channel
    }

    // 3. Concatenate RGB to transpose [224, 224, 3] -> [3, 224, 224] to a number array
    const transposedData = redArray.concat(greenArray).concat(blueArray);

    // 4. convert to float32
    let i, l = transposedData.length; // length, we need this for the loop
    // create the Float32Array size 3 * 224 * 224 for these dimensions output
    const float32Data = new Float32Array(dims[1] * dims[2] * dims[3]);
    for (i = 0; i < l; i++) {
      float32Data[i] = transposedData[i] / 255.0; // convert to float
    }
    // 5. create the tensor object from onnxruntime-web.
      const inputTensor = new Tensor("float32", float32Data, dims);

>       return inputTensor;

Reviewer 4: indentation

Author: fixed

  }

```
### modelHelper.ts
{: .no_toc }
The inputTensor is ready for inferencing. Let's call the default `modelHelper.ts` function and walk through the logic. First we create the `ort.InferenceSession` by sending in the path to the model and the `SessionOptions`. For the `executionProviders` you can use either `webgl` to use the GPU or `wasm` to use the CPU. See the documentation to learn more about the `SessionOptions` available for inferencing configuration [here](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/api/js/interfaces/InferenceSession.SessionOptions.html).

```javascript
import * as ort from 'onnxruntime-web';
import _ from 'lodash';
import {imagenetClasses} from '../data/imagenet';

> import { InferenceSession } from 'onnxruntime-web';

Reviewer 4: {InferenceSession} for consistency

Author: made spacing consistent to have a space before and after

const [predictions, inferenceTime] = await runSqueezenetModel(imageTensor);

export async function runSqueezenetModel(preprocessedData: any): Promise<[any, number]> {
    
    // Create session and set options. See the docs here for more options: 
    //https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/api/js/interfaces/InferenceSession.SessionOptions.html#graphOptimizationLevel

    const session = await ort.InferenceSession
                            .create('./_next/static/chunks/pages/squeezenet1_1.onnx', 

>                             { executionProviders: ['webgl'], graphOptimizationLevel: 'all' });

Reviewer 3: `graphOptimizationLevel: 'all'` actually does not apply to webgl. suggest to remove

Reviewer 3: we don't have an example for 'wasm' execution provider. do you want to add this ?

it will be helpful because you can demo users that they need to call:
```
ort.env.wasm.wasmPaths = {
   'ort-wasm.wasm': './_next/static/chunks/pages/ort-wasm.wasm',
   'ort-wasm-simd.wasm': './_next/static/chunks/pages/ort-wasm-simd.wasm'
};
```
before creating inference session

Author: This code works for both webgl and wasm, just update the config. I call this out in the text above the code " For the executionProviders you can use either webgl to use the GPU or wasm to use the CPU. See the documentation to learn more about the SessionOptions available for inferencing configuration here."

As for removing the `graphOptimizationLevel` I also think this should stay. Its not documented anywhere and I had to go into the source code to see how it works. Even if its not used here its good to have it documented.

    console.log('Inference session created')

    // Run inference and get results.
    var [results, inferenceTime] =  await runInference(session, preprocessedData);
    return [results, inferenceTime];

>  

Reviewer 4: no line break here

    // Get output results with the output name from the model export.
    const output = outputData[session.outputNames[0]];

    //Get the softmax of the output data. The softmax transforms values to be between 0 and 1
    var outputSoftmax = softmax(Array.prototype.slice.call(output.data))
    
    //Get the top 5 results.
    var results = imagenetClassesTopK(outputSoftmax, 5);
    console.log('results: ', results);
    return [results, inferenceTime];
  }
  ```

Once the inference completes, we return the top 5 results and time it took to run the inference. This is then displayed on the `ImageCanvas` web component.

## The `data` Folder
{: .no_toc }
The data folder in this template has `imagenetClasses` that is used to assign the label based on the inferencing result index. Additionally, there is a `sample-image-urls.ts` provided for testing the application.

## ImageCanvas FSX Element Web Component

The `ImageCanvas.tsx` web component has the button and display elements. Below is the logic for the web component:

```javascript

import {useRef, useState} from 'react';
import {IMAGE_URLS} from '../data/sample-image-urls';

> import { inferenceSqueezenet } from '../utils/predict'

Reviewer 4: {InferenceSqueezenet} for consistent and ending ';'

Author: fixed

> import styles from '../styles/Home.module.css'

Reviewer 4: missing ';'

Author: fixed line breaks

  height: number;
  width: number;
}

const ImageCanvas = (props: Props) => {

  const canvasRef = useRef<HTMLCanvasElement>(null);
  var image: HTMLImageElement;
  const [topResultLabel, setLabel] = useState("");
  const [topResultConfidence, setConfidence] = useState("");
  const [inferenceTime, setInferenceTime] = useState("");
  
  // Load the image from the IMAGE_URLS array
  const getImage = () => {
    var sampleImageUrls: Array<{ text: string; value: string }> = IMAGE_URLS;
    var random = Math.floor(Math.random() * (9 - 0 + 1) + 0)
    return sampleImageUrls[random];
  }

  // Draw image and other  UI elements then run inference
  const displayImageAndRunInference = () => { 
    // Get the image
    image = new Image();
    var sampleImage = getImage();
    image.src = sampleImage.value;

    // Clear out previous values.
    setLabel(`Inferencing...`)
    setConfidence("")
    setInferenceTime("")

    // Draw the image on the canvas
    const canvas = canvasRef.current
    const ctx = canvas!.getContext('2d')
    image.onload = () => {
      ctx!.drawImage(image, 0, 0, props.width, props.height)
    }
   
    // Run the inference
    submitInference();
  };

> //

Reviewer 4: remove unnecessary comment '//'

Author: removed
